Describe yourself or the organization you represent in 200 words or
less:

The Artificial Intelligence Group at the University of New Hampshire
is a community of graduate students, undergraduate students, and
faculty who are interested in learning about and expanding the field
of artificial intelligence. Our research includes, among other things,
heuristic search, machine learning, and applications of artificial
intelligence to bioinformatics. Members of our group as well as other
researchers at our university have explored parallel algorithms on
several multi-core platforms, most recently the Cell microprocessor
architecture. Our group is hoping to create, implement, and evaluate
multi-threaded AI applications, such as new algorithms for parallel
heuristic search. Our undergraduate program offers students many
opportunities to use equipment in a hands on fashion, both for
research and application development. In addition, our computer
science department organizes community outreach programs to teach high
school students about information technology.


Describe the type of equipment you're seeking in 200 words or less:

In order to better explore the area of parallel heuristic search, we
are interested in acquiring a machine which supports a large number of
concurrent threads, preferably upwards of 100. We feel that, for our
research, the speed of individual processors in not as important as
the number of supported threads. This is because we are exploring the
speedup of parallelism as the number of threads increases. Additionally
a system that suits our needs must also have a sufficient amount of
memory to accommodate heuristic searches in large domains. An amount
of 16 gigabytes or greater would be sufficient. For storage, any
reasonable quantity will suffice. We believe that many of the
configurations of the Sun SPARC T-series machines would suit our
purposes well.


Describe why you need the equipment in no more than 600 words:

Over the past few decades we have seen major increases in the
processing speeds of CPUs. We are coming to a point, however, where it
is no longer feasible to create processors with higher clock
speeds. It is widely accepted that the next generations of computers
are going to rely on parallelism instead of processor cycles for
increased performance. In order to make better use of this upcoming
hardware, the artificial intelligence community will need to begin
creating algorithms that make use of concurrency between multiple CPU
cores.

Heuristic search is one of the most fundamental tools used in the
field of artificial intelligence. It is used to explore
the space of possible action sequences that can be performed in order
to achieve a desired goal and generalizes across many
problem domains. This technique can be used for path planning, job scheduling,
constraint satisfaction, combinatorial optimization, and even game
strategies. Today, most heuristic search algorithms are sequential;
they only make use of a single processor core. In order to adapt the
field of artificial intelligence to the next generation of computers,
we believe that it will be necessary to reformulate search algorithms
so that they can take advantage of parallel computing on multi-core
machines.

Our goal for this project is to explore novel methods of performing
heuristic search on machines with many CPU cores. We hope to examine
algorithms that minimize memory contention while spreading the work
out among cores as efficiently as possible. The algorithm we have
designed and those we will examine are generalizable across many of
the domains for which heuristic search is traditionally used and scale
well with the number of concurrent threads. Our algorithm is unique in
that it splits up the search space based on the quality of paths,
instead of giving equal attention to less desirable sections of the
state space.

The use of this equipment is not, however, limited to the project
described above. There is much more room for advancement in parallel
search algorithms beyond the scope of our current work. We are also
interested in researching the parallelization of other artificial
intelligence algorithms for bioinformatics, reinforcement learning,
and possibly more. Having the equipment on hand will encorage our
group members to pursue these avenues further.

In addition, the equipment would benefit the department and university
as a whole by providing a resource for many researchers. Other
researchers interested in parallel computing would be able to use the
equipment to extend their work to another platform, because we
currently do not have any equipment capable of handling such large
numbers of threads.

This equipment would aslo be useful as a part of demonstrations to
attract new students and educate local high school students. Our
outreach programs often involve showing students the types of
technology we work with. We would be able to show the equipment to
potential students, as well as the results of our work with it.